This is an interview with Lynn Bond, Lieutenant
Colonel, United States Marine Corps, retired by
Shannon Bond on April 3, 1993, at his home in
Richardson, Texas, concerning his involvement
in the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge, I'm asking you to donate
this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you? It's perfectly all right. OK.
Start out with, could you please Tell us your date
and place of birth. I was born in Bullard, Texas,
June the 18th, 1932. And tell us about your
educational background. I attended grade school
and high school in Bullard, and I graduated from
Bullard High School in 1949 and joined
the Marine Corps at that point. I subsequently
attended night school and obtained roughly two
years of college in night school. And that's the
extent of my formal education. OK. Why did you
enlist in the Marine Corps to begin with? I'm not
really sure. I think it was probably twofold. One,
at that time, we were about to enter into a
depression type economic period. It was very hard
to get a job. I did not have good enough grades to get
a scholarship to college and would have had a great
deal of trouble supporting myself and paying for
college at the same time. So, one, I wanted to be
covered under the GI Bill, which still was in force
from World War II at that time, and Secondly, I
really didn't know what I wanted to do. And so it was
kind of on a lark that a friend of mine one day says,
why don't we join the Marine Corps? And so we went to
Tyler, joined, was supposed to come back the next
day to go to boot camp. I came back. He didn't. So I
wound up going by myself. OK. How did you wind up in
Vietnam?
Well, I volunteered to go to Vietnam. In 1967, I
completed Amphibious Warfare School at
Quantico, Virginia. I was a major at that time.
And,
well, it was the thing to do. We were fairly heavily
engaged at that time, and it was being escalated,
the number of forces that was going. So I
volunteered to go. It's kind of academic. They
would have sent me sooner or later anyway, because
the requirements for forces had reached the point
where everybody was going to go sooner or later.
But I wanted to go. I believed that what we were
doing was just, was right and of course I don't
think you could be a good Marine or a good soldier
and not want to be involved in whatever was going on
with your country. So I vowed there. Okay.
Were you surprised by the Tet Offensive and why or
why not? Yes, very much so.
Just prior to the Tet Offensive, My battalion, 2nd
Battalion, 26 Marines, had responsibility for
the Hue Phu Bai area and for the main road that led
from, actually, I think it goes from well up in the
North Vietnam all the way down to Saigon. We had
responsibility for about 50 kilometers of road
which included Hue Phu Bai, which is one of the
major cities in, let's say, central Vietnam. And
there was not very much activity as far as the Viet
Cong was concerned at that time. But about three
weeks before the Tet Offensive, my battalion was
given orders to move up to the northeast
anchor on the DMZ, not on the DMZ, it's been so long
now I'm having trouble remembering some of these
places. I had to, it was Hoang Song, it was a line
that went across Vietnam which was known at that
time as the McNamara Line. And we were ordered up to
that location I took half of the battalion and
started up there and just before we reached that
point they changed our orders and sent us to Khe
Sanh. So actually I spent the entire Tet Offensive
in Khe Sanh. While the Tet Offensive was going on
primarily in Hue Phu Bai and in Saigon, they also
made a major effort to capture Khe Sanh. Now Khe
Sanh is on the western part of Vietnam over near the
Laotian border and so I spent the siege of Khe Sanh
there but yes the activities around Hue Phu Bai
which I was the most familiar with was very light
and so the the Tet Offensive of 68 67, 68 came as
quite a surprise to me. Okay, you've already
mentioned Khe Sanh and understand that the siege
was just involved some very fierce fighting and
there's been stories of conditions on the North
Vietnamese side being so bad that they had to eat
rats and things like that. Tell me about Khe Sanh
all that you can. Well, I don't know anything about
the the Vietnamese portion of that. First, I think
you should realize that a person's views of any
combat situation is very, very subjective. My
views is going to be different from anyone else's.
That doesn't make mine right, nor does it make the
other people's wrong. It is my personal opinion.
that there has been more pure garbage written
about Vietnam than probably any other war that
ever was fought.
I know we used to get reports and I would get letters
and so forth about from home about how bad
everything was in Khe Sanh and so forth and what all
was going on about how the Vietnamese were
tunneling under our lines, and so on and so forth.
And it was pure hogwash.
The siege of Quezon was primarily a situation
where they sat and pounded us with rockets and
artillery for, oh, I don't know, 70 or 80 days,
something along those lines. And we did sit there
and were pounded. in a terrible way for this period
of time.
But we were dug in. Everybody was in trenches and
bunkers that had overhead protection and that
included runway matting with sand bags on top of
it. Generally speaking there was very little need
to get out of your bunker. So we simply sat there.
And they simply fired their artillery and so
forth. The truth of the matter is, it was not
extremely effective.
We had the 1st Battalion 9th Marines, the 3rd
Battalion 26th Marines, Well, 1st, 2nd, 3rd
Battalion, the 26th Marines were all at Khe Sanh
and reinforced by the 1st Battalion, 9th Marines.
There was also Army Special Forces there who had
their positions actually set up outside of the Khe
Sanh Combat Bay. Now, a portion of the 2nd
Battalion, 26th Marines later left the combat
base and went into a blocking position about five
or six kilometers north of the base. We also had a
reinforced rifle company that was on a hill north,
northwest of the base. And the 3rd Battalion, 26
Marines, had a company that was on, I believe it was
Hill 881, but I I don't recall a lot of this. Now,
there were times when our units that were on the
hills, 881 and I believe it was 812, their
positions were attacked several times by some
rather significant forces. But the main combat
base, only had minor probes as far as infantry
attacks on the base is concerned. Everything else
was just pure artillery and rocket attacks, which
were quite severe for many, many days. And so that
was hard on the troops, but it really wasn't a big
deal.
How many was out there? I don't know.
They told us at varying times that there was
probably as many as 50,000 North Vietnamese. And
these were North Vietnamese, not Viet Cong. These
were North Vietnamese troops. But we had
one battalion and one battery of artillery inside
the combat base. All of our other artillery
support came from Camp Carroll, which was, oh,
about 10, 15,000 meters away. But we had all the air
support that anyone could ever ask for to include
B-29s, which we never asked for, but on several
occasions were directed to use. So we had to come up
with targets for B-29s. And when told that we
really didn't have any targets for B-29, we were
told to select them because LBJ, that's
president, had said that he is going to do
everything humanly possible to see to it that we
were not overrun. Now, they were indicating that
it was imminent that the combat base would be
overrun by the day. We never felt that it would be.
They gave us intelligence reports at varying
times that there
would be an armored attack by the North
Vietnamese. And they
tried to make it look like it was a lot worse than it
really was. Had there been an armored attack of any
significance, we might have had a problem. If my
memory serves me correctly, we had a sum total of
five tanks.
And
other than that, each battalion had a 106
recoil-less rifle, platoon, and of course, each
infantry company has 3.5 rockets, which are
anti-tank weapons. But a concerted armored
attack. And they could have indeed overrun the
base because we had inadequate armor. And if they
selected to do this at a time when the air could not
have been used, then they could have overrun the
base. Now, the weather up there at that time was
such that often you could not use air until noon.
because of the fog and so forth. But I think the
severity of the action around Quezon, for the most
part, other than the fact that they used their
artillery to pound us for a long time, has probably
been grossly overstated.
What impact do you feel that firepower had on the
war?
Well, first of all,
I assume you mean from both sides here.
We had superior firepower. There's no question
about it. Except at that particular place and at
that particular time. They had amassed more
rockets and artillery than what we had. As I
indicated, the only artillery that we had was a
reinforced artillery battalion. It was a 105
battalion reinforced with one battery of 155
howitzers. We could get 175 support from Camp
Carroll. Then everything else we got in the way of
firepower had to be air. This was at a time that
our all-weather capability was not quite as good
as a lot of people thought it was. So during periods
of reduced visibility, your air support was
somewhat questionable. And this was also before
we started using our so-called smart bomb. They
were everything we used up until this point was
dumb bombs. And when you're using dumb bombs, you
don't get anywhere near the effectiveness that a
lot of people would have you believe. But we, well,
first of all, they had no air in South Vietnam. To
the best of my knowledge, they never used air
against our infantry forces. I know they didn't
against us, and to the best of my knowledge, they
never did against any US ground forces. We had
such vast air superiority that it was just no
contest. And we were able to use it quite
effectively, but the Vietnamese soldier,
Totally different from the U.S. soldier. He was
not as well trained in many, many ways, but he was
far more disciplined in that he would dig tunnels,
he would dig trenches and so forth that would give
him more protection. And as a result, you might
think that you had done a tremendous amount of
damage in an artillery barrage or in an airstrike,
and come to find out, you really hadn't. I mean,
when the smoke cleared up and you'd go back into
that area, you'd find that he's still there and was
ready to fight. But the
firepower was the deciding factor in our side of
the thing. But when they decided that they wanted
to stay and fight, they could stay and fight with
the best of them. The oriental, not the oriental,
yeah, I guess the oriental soldier is very, very
disciplined. And he will stay and do what he's
told. The Chinese communists in Korea were a lot
like that. They lost a lot of men, but losing a lot of
men was no big deal to them. You could wipe out a
battalion and they'd simply send another
battalion up and it didn't bother them. They
didn't have a situation where the mothers and
fathers at home got upset and wouldn't support the
government. I doubt very seriously if a battalion
commander had to write home and say, hey, Your son
has been killed. Whereas we had to write in each
navigation, we even had to tell how it happened.
But I'm getting off the beaten path. But firepower
was very, very important.
Were you optimistic about winning the war? When
you first arrived in Vietnam, why or why not? Oh,
yes.
I was optimistic. We had vastly superior forces.
And at that time, what we were doing is we were
confronting the Viet Cong. We were, you know, this
was before the North Vietnamese was involved in
any significant extent.
I guess a lot of it was ego, but we like to believe
that the little Viet Cong peasant soldier was no
match for us, no match for our equipment, no match
for our firepower. They didn't have helicopters,
for instance. We could get in helicopters and move
about as we saw fit. If the Viet Cong wanted to move a
force, they walked. They didn't have trucks for
all practical purposes. And so yeah, I thought we
could take care of it without any trouble. And
secondly, I thought that what was taught in
military doctrine at the time was the way to defeat
a guerrilla army is to go into the area and to win the
hearts and minds of the people in the area, and
hence the guerrilla then had no base of support.
And that was really our major effort when I got
there, was to go in and win the hearts and minds of
the people. And I thought we were doing a pretty
good job of it, but apparently we were not, because
The Vietcong continued to increase their forces
and then of course the North Vietnamese moved in to
take over and then it was a different ballgame
altogether. What about when you left the war? Well
I left from Quezon and
my Initial judgment at that time was that they had
lost quite a large force in that Tet Offensive. And
they had lost a lot of people in the Tet Offensive.
And I wondered if they had the will as a country, now
I'm talking North Vietnam now, to continue to
fight. I guess what I should have been concerned
about was whether or not we had the will as a country
to continue to fight. Because that was at the time
when the anti-war forces back in the United States
really started growing and started having an
effect.
But I thought that we could still win the war, well I
still believe we could have won
if as a nation we had a goal of winning rather than
just a status quo. So I believe that there was an
error as far as a national goal is concerned in the
Vietnam War.
The first time you were in Vietnam, you were only
there for seven months. Yeah. Why was that? Well,
on the way to Vietnam, I was, we stopped on Okinawa,
and they changed my orders. A general that I had
worked for back in Camp Lejeune saw my orders on the
way through, and he had just moved there to form
Fleet Marine Force Pacific forward staff and was
told, you can take anybody you see coming through
and form your staff. Well, he knew me. And he pulled
me off. And all the begging and pleading and crying
and so forth would not change his mind one iota. But
he did promise me that after six months, he would
send me on into Vietnam, which what he did and
that's why it was for only seven months.
Okay. Tell me your feelings about the anti-war
movement.
Well, I think they were wrong. You know, it's just
that simple. I'm not against people protesting. I
think that that's one of our basic rights. And if
you did not have the right to disagree with your
government, then you would not have a true
democracy.
I believe this all started, however, through a
group of what were referred to then as hippies,
which were really just anti-establishment. They
were against everything. government was doing
and it just happened that the government was
involved in war and that just happened to be
something that that they could could gather a lot
of emotional support for i think most of the people
involved in the the vietnamese war were doing so
just because they they were against everything
And I think there's a distinct difference between
having an honest disagreement with what your
government is doing and exercising
a right which I support to the fullest to disagree,
and then just being disagreeable. Now, it's hard
to say the vast majority, but I will say this, that
the vast majority of the leadership of the
anti-war parties our anti-war group, in my
judgment, were totally and completely worthless
people.
And I think it was wrong. And even though they had
the right to do it, it did cost many lives. And it
created an atmosphere in this country that the
truth of the matter is we're just now working our
way out of
it. The Desert Storm Operation did a tremendous
amount to reunite and refocus the unity of the
country. But up until that point, They had been
very successful in the anti-war environment that
they had been able to create in this country. And
how do I feel about it? I think it was absolutely
terrible. I mean, you take a Jane Fonda, for
instance, who went to North Vietnam, had pictures
made of her on an anti-aircraft gun while US forces
were flying combat missions over there and were
being shot down by those very things. I can't
forgive her for that.
There is a perfectly acceptable dissent. She
passed way beyond that. There are conscientious
objectors. No problem with them. The vast
majority of the people we're talking about though
were not just conscientious objectors. They were
just objectors.
They objected to everything.
When I left Vietnam, I went to Washington. And I got
there after several of the big riots took place
much of which were caused by the anti-war
demonstrators. Part of it was civil rights, but
the vast majority of this was not civil rights. The
vast majority of it evolved around the anti-war
demonstrators. ROTC armories, for instance, on
college campuses weren't safe. People were
breaking into those. They were stealing weapons.
They were burning them. They were picketing
around ROTCs,
calling these young students killers, and so on
and so forth. They were terribly objective
people.
And if I didn't feel so strongly about the basic
rights and privileges
what we have here in America. I would say, you know,
let's exterminate these people. But they have the
right to do it. And as objectionable as they are, in
the final analysis, I truly believe that they were
the very best advertisement for democracy there
has ever been anywhere in the world because in
russia and china and other places where this is
they they could look and see and say how in the world
can that nation allow people to do this see that's
the true definition of freedom when you have the
freedom to do that then you've got real freedom And
like I say, had they been smart enough to know that
they were democracy's best advertisement,
they wouldn't have done it. They wouldn't have
done it. And so I guess we have to give them a certain
amount of credit for what we see throughout the
world now. Russia, Russian communism. having
gone down the tubes. All the other European
communistic countries having gone down the
tubes. The complete and total failure of
communism throughout the world.